---
layout: default
title: A Message from the Ambra Developers
navigation_weight: 1

---

Ambra has been under continuous development as the engine behind the [PLOS
journals][journals] since 2009. For its first two major versions, Ambra was a
monolithic Struts webapp, which has been offered as open source since its
beginning.

In 2012, PLOS began a project to re-architect Ambra as a service-oriented,
multi-component stack. PLOS has actively used these new components in its
journal platform since 2013 and they completely replaced the legacy Ambra
webapp in early 2016. However, they were packaged up and added to PLOS’s
open-source offering only starting in 2017.

Because this newest incarnation of the Ambra stack has been targeted only at
in-house users for so long, you might not have the most user-friendly
experience in setting it up. The documentation on this website is intended to
provide everything you need to get started, but you may encounter omissions,
bugs, or other obstacles. If you do, we encourage you to [contact us][email].
If the project’s current state is rough around the edges, it is because it is
relatively new to third-party use and needs feedback from prospective users.
Your response will drive future improvement of the externally facing side of
the project.

We hope that what the current Ambra stack may lack in user-friendliness and
polish, it will make up for in robustness, flexibility, and an unparalleled
focus on the needs of [Open Access][oa] scholarly publishing. Thank you for
your interest in this software. We have put a lot into it, and we hope you can
get something out of it to promote the causes of open science and open
software.

  [journals]: http://journals.plos.org/
  [email]:    mailto:dev@ambraproject.org
  [oa]:       https://www.plos.org/open-access/
